#summary Which judges give high points?

Which judges give high points? The average speaker points a judge assigns is a simplistic answer to this simply-stated question. A better question might be "Which judges give higher points than the judging pool overall to the same quality speeches?"

To answer this, we could compare the points that a judge gives to a certain debater to the points that debater earned over the course of the year. However, this doesn't account for debaters who change divisions or who improve from September to March. It also doesn't account for tournaments where the speaker point average was higher or lower.

To see whether a judge (Alice) gives higher points than her colleagues, let's compare the points given by Alice to the points given by other judges to the same debaters at the same tournaments at which Alice judged them.

We'll compare these sets with the Mann-Whitney U test, adjusted for ties, then rank judges by the deviation of this statistic from the expected value.

Here are some point distributions for particular years, divisions, and judges. The population distribution is gray, while the judge distribution is red or green. A red distribution is a judge who gives low points; a green distribution is a judge who gives high points.

JV Reed's point distribution is very similar to the rest of the pool; his U score is very close to the expected value.

http://chart.apis.google.com/chart?cht=lxy&chs=420x270&chd=t:26.5000,26.5000,27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000,29.0000,29.0000,29.5000,29.5000|3.1250,3.1250,5.4688,5.4688,23.4375,23.4375,34.3750,34.3750,27.3438,27.3438,5.4688,5.4688,0.7813,0.7813|25.0000,25.0000,25.5000,25.5000,26.0000,26.0000,26.5000,26.5000,27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000,29.0000,29.0000,29.5000,29.5000|0.0639,0.0639,0.0639,0.0639,0.0639,0.0639,1.0856,1.0856,8.5568,8.5568,22.2861,22.2861,35.2490,35.2490,24.1379,24.1379,7.7267,7.7267,0.7663,0.7663&chds=24,30.0,0,36,24,30.0,0,36&chco=00bb00,555555,ff0000,705000&chma=10,10,10,10&chtt=JV%20Reed|2009:%2032%20open%20debates|deviation:%200.03&chxt=y,x&chxr=0,0,36|1,24,30,1&chg=16.666666666667,0,3,3&chm=o,000000,0,-1,3|o,000000,1,-1,3&dum.png

Not every low-deviation distribution, however, looks similar to the pool's distribution. The U score is roughly a measure of how likely it is that a score given by Alice (in this case, by Conor Cleary or by Brady Fletcher, respectively) is greater than a score given by the pool. This likelihood may be near 50% even if the distributions look quite different.

|| http://chart.apis.google.com/chart?cht=lxy&chs=420x270&chd=t:27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000|12.5000,12.5000,25.6579,25.6579,50.0000,50.0000,11.8421,11.8421|26.0000,26.0000,26.5000,26.5000,27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000,29.0000,29.0000,29.5000,29.5000,30.0000,30.0000|0.6140,0.6140,1.5789,1.5789,14.2982,14.2982,27.5439,27.5439,34.2982,34.2982,18.2456,18.2456,3.0702,3.0702,0.1754,0.1754,0.1754,0.1754&chds=24,30.0,0,51,24,30.0,0,51&chco=ff0000,555555,ff0000,705000&chma=10,10,10,10&chtt=Conor%20Cleary|2009:%2038%20open%20debates|deviation:%20-0.01&chxt=y,x&chxr=0,0,51|1,24,30,1&chg=16.666666666667,0,3,3&chm=o,000000,0,-1,3|o,000000,1,-1,3&dum.png || http://chart.apis.google.com/chart?cht=lxy&chs=420x270&chd=t:26.0000,26.0000,26.5000,26.5000,27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000|2.5000,2.5000,7.5000,7.5000,28.7500,28.7500,46.2500,46.2500,6.2500,6.2500,8.7500,8.7500|24.0000,24.0000,24.5000,24.5000,25.0000,25.0000,25.5000,25.5000,26.0000,26.0000,26.5000,26.5000,27.0000,27.0000,27.5000,27.5000,28.0000,28.0000,28.5000,28.5000,29.0000,29.0000,29.5000,29.5000,30.0000,30.0000|1.8325,1.8325,0.2618,0.2618,2.6178,2.6178,0.5236,0.5236,9.4241,9.4241,7.0681,7.0681,25.9162,25.9162,18.0628,18.0628,19.6335,19.6335,7.8534,7.8534,4.4503,4.4503,1.5707,1.5707,0.7853,0.7853&chds=24,30.0,0,47,24,30.0,0,47&chco=00bb00,555555,ff0000,705000&chma=10,10,10,10&chtt=Brady%20Fletcher|2009:%2020%20novice%20debates|deviation:%200.09&chxt=y,x&chxr=0,0,47|1,24,30,1&chg=16.666666666667,0,3,3&chm=o,000000,0,-1,3|o,000000,1,-1,3&dum.png ||