> This is controversial, but have you ever considered parsing a wide data set
> for regional bias?

Do you mean to see if judges are more likely to vote for teams from
their own region?

I had not thought of that. I did some preliminary analysis based on
your suggestion.

I looked at the 4651 paneled rounds in the debateresults.com database
in which the opponents shared neither a CEDA region nor an NDT
district. For rounds like this, I called a judge possibly biased if he
or she shared more districts or regions with one team than with the
other.

Of these 4651 paneled rounds between teams not sharing any leagues, in
1279 rounds the unbiased judges split evenly. In these, 1547 ballots
from possibly biased judges went to the team they could be biased
toward. 1506 ballots from possibly biased judges went to the team they
could be biased against. That's 50.7% of ballots going towards the
team that the judge shared some leagues with. If we only consider a
judge biased if he or she shares both a CEDA region and an NDT
district with one of the teams, the percentage goes up to 51.9%.

I am uncomfortable ascribing any significance to these numbers,
though, because there are some confounding factors. For instance, if
region A has larger teams with larger budgets, they might get more
practice (and better HS recruits) than region B. At national
tournaments, region B teams are both (1) more likely to lose and (2)
less likely to see a familiar judge. (1) could be based on skill
alone.

That confounding factor is why I tested panel rounds rather than just
all rounds between teams from different regions, in which I suspect
the "larger regions get more practice" factor would be even greater.

Some other confounding factors could result from teams traveling from
outside the region to mostly regional tournaments. Those teams may be
more tired, or feel they have more to prove, or may be of higher
average ability (since the coach bothered to fly them).

Anyway, is this what you mean by "regional bias"?
